# HEMA Fencing Sequence Generator 5000

Final project for the Building AI course

## Summary

A machine learning solution for generating and evaluating sequences of swordplay actions in the style of historical European fencing treatises from the 15th and 16th century.

Current Status: Added a simple feed-forward neural network to generate sequences. Currently trained only with one short sequence. Next steps: type in more training sequences, evaluate if the generated sequences have some sense to them, at least slightly more than a purely random choice.

## Background

Several Italian and German fencing treatises from the 15th and 16th centuries use as a pedagogical device a series of choreographed example plays where the movements are described with the help of named guard positions and named actions. The guard positions represent postures at specific instants in the flow of the actions, for example a snippet of a play:  

"Essendo rimaso in guardia alta, de lì voglio che tu traghi uno tramazon a zinghiara porta di ferro, cioè con il tuo piè manco innanci, alquanto per traverso, verso alle parti dritte dello inimico e lì aspetterai il ditto nimico che tragha uno mandritto, o uno roverso, o ponta o tramazon per testa o per gamba, tiri lui dove el si voglia:" -- Achille Marozzo (Opera Nova, 1568)

This snippet can be distilled to the sequence: "guardia alta" (starting position) -> "tramazzone" (cutting action) -> "zinghiara porta di ferro" (the position where the action brings us) -> waiting for a counter-attack

The aim of this project is to experiment with generating such sequences in the various fencing styles of the historical fencing masters.

## Data and AI techniques

Although there are a good number of such treatises surviving and they contain hundreds of suitable plays, my initial guess is that the dataset will prove to be somewhat small. For that reason, and because of my private curiosity towards other ML techniques apart from the ubiquitous LLMs, instead of trying to fine-tune an existing language model to these ancient dialects and the fencing instruction they contain, I'll start by extracting the example sequences as a pre-processing step and try training a smaller model to those. Given the relatively small dataset the pre-processing seems still feasible to do by hand if necessary and there are also various interpretations already done by the HEMA community and written in a tabular format. Once the sequences are extracted my intention is to experiment with different types of ML techniques and compare the results. As the different fencing styles of the various masters have a great deal in common (after all the human body and the implements designed to harm it are practically the same for each style), it might be best to first train general fencing models using training data corresponding to all of the styles mixed together and at a later stage experiment with fine-tuning them to a specific style. At some point additional training data might perhaps be generated by hand picking some model generated sequences that are fitting a fencing style particularly well.

## How is it used?

The model can serve as a training tool for a HEMA practitioner by generating additional training sequences once the sequences from the primary sources are becoming too familiar. Alternatively a variant of the model could be used to give an "in-styleness" grade for the practitioners own sequences. Just training the model and evaluating if the generated sequences make sense at all or fit a particular style is an extremely valuable exercise in itself, not only for understanding AI but also for understanding HEMA. 

## Challenges

While operating strictly inside the system of the named guards and the connecting named actions, it is unlikely that the model will capture much about the real world constraints of fencing and body movement. The historical sequences from the treatises require a lot of interpretation before being put into practice and it will be even more so with our model. For that reason the model will likely be of little or no use in, for example, automatic creation of fencing sequences for games or computer animations.

## What next?

The first stages of the project are going to be pre-processing training data from the treatises and training small models of various types and configurations with it. The results will be compared to each other. A possible next step would be taking an existing language model in a relevant language and trying to fine-tune it to work with the text from the treatises directly. After that the results could be compared to the results from the small models. Going even further it might be useful to try to overcome the limitations mentioned in the previous chapter. To do that it would be possible to include in the model some rudimentary idea of how the various guards and actions actually are when performed by a human. Perhaps a simple stick-man model first, with only a few positions for each limb (up, down, front, back, etc.) and see if that has an impact (pun not intended). 

## Acknowledgments

Although at this point there is not a single line of code to show, my initial experiments are done with scikit-learn and it is most likely I will continue to use it throughout the project.

The actual fencing knowledge embedded in the sequences is the result of hard work in dangerous conditions by the respective fencing masters, their students and everybody who partecipated in the duelling culture of the old Europe.
